
---
---

The Power of T-Groups and Experiential Learning
Overview
If you are reading this paper you are preparing to embark on a unique
learning journey. The majority of that learning will occur in a T-group-- a
small, unstructured group with an ambiguous task and no leader. This paper
is intended to help you better understand the pedagogy, the reason we use it
and how to best prepare to get the most out of your Interpersonal Dynamic
experience.
T-Groups, or Training Groups, were developed by NTL (National Training
Laboratories Institute for Applied Behavioral Science) over 50 years ago and
further expanded at the Graduate School of Business at Stanford University.
The famous humanistic psychologist Carl Rogers said that T-groups were
the most powerful educational innovation of the 20th century. We would
argue that this methodology is even more relevant in the 21st Century since
learning to develop effective interpersonal relationships and high performing
teams (especially with people who are different than us) is among the most
critical competencies a leader needs in this era of globalization and
interdependence.
What is a T-group?
Describing a T-group to someone who has never participated in one is a bit
like describing how one learns to ski to someone who has never seen skis or
snow. We acknowledge that no matter how much detail we provide and how
much we explain, it will be difficult to fully grasp this form of learning until
you have actually experienced it.
Learning in T-group is likely to be frustrating (at least initially) because
learning how to learn in a T-group environment is unlike any other learning
we have ever done. To return to our skiing analogy, when we learn to ski we
fall down often in the beginning and it takes a while before we feel the
exhilaration of remaining upright long enough to feel the wind in our face as
we glide effortlessly down a hill. A lot of the learning occurs by trial and
error and in fits and starts.
A T-group is a learning laboratory in which group members explore and
learn leadership and group membership skills by participating freely with

one another, sharing “here and now” experiences and reactions and
giving/receiving feedback to/from each other. T-groups are the purest form
of experiential learning. Participants work in a small group (roughly 12
participants who do not know each other and are very unlikely to work
together in the future) with two experienced facilitators (aka trainers). The
group meets for about 20 hours over the span of five days in multiple two- to
three-hour sessions per day. During these sessions, participants learn from
their interactions with each other and through the exploration of their own
and others’ reactions, perceptions and behaviors. While general sessions
with the full cohort provide conceptual material in formats that are more
familiar to participants, the deepest and most important lessons occur in the
T-group.
T-Groups are different than any other group in that they create an intentional
“organizational vacuum” for the explicit purpose of drawing out central
interpersonal issues. A T-group, by design, initially lacks three
characteristics that are necessary in order for a group to function: 1) there is
no formal leader (the faculty, when in the role of facilitators/trainers, will
not play that role), 2) there is no set task (other than the amorphous
assignment of “building a learning group”), and 3) there are no established
rules of procedure.
How Learning Occurs
No group can be successful without some type of initiative/leadership,
purpose, or norms regarding how people are expected to behave. In filling
the vacuum that has been deliberately created in a T-group, group members
feel internal pressure to reduce ambiguity and work out a myriad of issues
such as:
• How can we get to know each other in meaningful ways? How can we
connect across our differences?
• What are the topics that are most likely to provide learning (vs. just
fill the air to pass time)? And how do we change topics when one isn’t
especially interesting?
• Can we share our feelings (of being bored, dissatisfied or bothered)?
• How can we learn to communicate more effectively and
authentically?
• How much of ourselves should we allow others to see?
• How do we make decisions? 
What does it take to be accepted as a valued group member?
• How is influence shown, and how can each of us be influential?
• How do we reconcile member responsibility to the group and freedom
of the individual?
• What is legitimate pressure vs. coercion?
• How can we challenge/be challenged without this becoming an unsafe
place?
• How can we give and receive feedback that is helpful and not
destructive?
As members struggle to resolve these and other issues, they start to have
reactions to others and to what is occurring. The “learning laboratory”
springs to life. Here is an example of how that might occur:
• The trainer might begin by saying, “Our task is to build a learning
laboratory where we can learn from each other. I don’t know what
each of you came to learn, so it is our collective responsibility to
decide how we are going to operate.” And then lapse into
silence. “What should we do?” asks Rob? “What do you think would
be helpful in building a learning group?” the trainer responds. Joe
suggests that people say where they are from. Jerry objects, “We can
read that in the roster” he says somewhat curtly. Another moment of
silence ensues. A second suggestion is made that it might be more
meaningful to return to the prior evening’s structured activity and
more deeply explore why everyone came to this program and what
each person hopes to get out of it. Several members answer until
Jerry says, “I feel pressured into responding and I am not ready for
this yet.”
• As time goes on, Mary is starting to resent the way that Joe seems to
be taking over the group, but is unsure whether it is OK to show
annoyance. Rachel is bothered by Jerry who seems to block most
suggestions, but is not sure what to say because she had trouble with a
few of those suggestions herself. Sam is resentful of the trainers who
he thinks are manipulating the group, “know the answer” and are
holding out on disclosing all they know. Joe has now proposed two
ideas that were ignored entirely and is not feeling very valued by the
group; he muses that this is often what happens to him back at
work. Jane is feeling excited about what is happening but is afraid 
that she would be seen as trying to ingratiate herself to the trainers
were she to express her excitement.
Group members then begin to experiment with sharing their reactions and
providing feedback to each other. As member involvement increases, it
provides additional potential for learning. The feedback from others is not
only on what is annoying or dysfunctional, but also on what is useful and
appreciated. For example:
• Henry often introduces remarks with sensitivity and care that helps the
group deal with conflict.
• Bob sees that Marie has grown somewhat silent and seems detached
from the discussion so he invites her back in to the discussion.
• Conversation in the session has been dragging; Bill points that out and
helps the group identify what would be a more meaningful discussion
topic while also acknowledging Joe’s efforts in having introduced the
original topic.
As the week progresses a greater number of interpersonal exchanges occur
among more of the participants. Group dynamics become more and more
complex and participants learn, through experience, how to be more
interpersonally effective and build a strong learning group. This results in
increased awareness of the impact of different behaviors on different people,
an incentive to test new behaviors (and thus broaden one’s range) and the
joint development of a venue that facilitates real time feedback as
participants learn to name what is working and what is not.
Much of our behavior (certainly at work) is heavily influenced by our role,
as a manager or employee, or by our function (e.g. Marketing, Finance,
Production). In a T-group, these role demands are removed. What is most
likely to emerge under those circumstances is a person’s dominant style.
Does Joe have a tendency to “take-over” without checking with
others? Does Jerry often resist authority or others who step in to accomplish
tasks in ambiguous situations? Is Mary conflict-avoidant? Does Bob often
bring others who are feeling marginalized at work into the discussion and
not realize what an asset he is to a group? These styles and preferences
might not surface in a typical training program where participants can sit
back with a workshop leader who sets the learning agenda and “runs the
show”. In a T-group participants develop their own learning goals and share
the responsibility for collectively building a learning laboratory. That means 
every group member is expected to contribute; it is hard for anyone to stand
by and only play the observer role.
Though we generally know what we do and don’t do well, we often don’t
understand the specific behaviors (or the impact of those behaviors) that
underlie our strengths and weaknesses. Among the most important outcomes
of a T-group experience is the feedback every member receives from fellow
groups members. Often we learn there is a gap between what we intended
when engaging in a particular behavior and the impact of that behavior on
the other person.
Beyond specific feedback received, equally critical outcomes of a T-Group
are learning how to raise difficult issues in a productive matter as well as
connect effectively with others. For example:
• How to raise concerns with someone else in a way that is direct but
not destructive.
• How to help someone else learn how to leverage their strengths.
• How to express one’s needs and be fully heard.
• How to build a climate where interpersonal learning can occur.
• How to understand ourselves and what we do that helps us gain (or
lose) influence
• How to communicate in a way that results in others feeling closer and
more trusting of us (vs. distanced and not trusting.)
Why the T-group Pedagogy?
Most executives will freely admit that the interpersonal aspects of their job
are far more challenging than those that are technical. Furthermore,
Executive Search firms estimate that over 80% of leaders who are
terminated lose their job as a result of insufficiently developed interpersonal
skills. Even those who do not lose their job find their inability to become
more interpersonally skilled career-limiting.
Of the many pedagogical approaches that exist (e.g. cases, role-plays, group
projects and simulations), 45+ years of experience at Stanford’s Business
School has shown us that the T-group methodology is the best way to
significantly broaden skills in building and maintaining highly functional
relationships. T-groups are uniquely valuable because:
The focus is on what is happening in real time among the participants.
Even though the topics in a case discussion can be important, they are
distant from what the participant faces here and now in the
group. Case discussions also tend to explore issues at a conceptual
level without addressing the feelings and consequences that arise. In a
T-group, the participant has no choice but to address issues in the
moment. For example: I have to resolve this conflict with you, right
now, in this room. Or, I have to figure out how to contribute to
building a functional group. Or, you are really different from me in
so many ways; what do we need from each other in order to find some
way to connect so that we can work well together?
• Everyone is a witness to what has occurred. This makes for a very rich
and complete data set to be “mined” for learning. For example, Ted
might be trying to make a connection with Harry that doesn’t seem to
be going anywhere. Others can share how they would react to Ted’s
approach (with Ted) and/or some might add that they, too, have had
difficulty connecting with Harry. Ted and Harry will learn much,
much more about how they are perceived and what behaviors help or
hinder their ability to connect with others in this setting than they
could in a case or a role-play.
• The learning is “self-referential” and individualized. Different
participants have different learning needs. Sam has a tendency to
over-control a group while Stan tends to hold back. Sally finds it
difficult to disagree with others whereas Susan tends to focus on the
negative and rarely comments on what others do well. Jerry tends to
give way to authority whereas Jean is likely to fight it. Sooner or later
in the group, situations will arise where members can find out what
elements of their style are effective and what elements prevent them
from achieving their goals. This is what we mean when we say
learning in a T-group is “self-referential”. Every participant sets and
works his or her own learning goals.
• They are learning laboratories in which participants can experiment.
People walk around with certain assumptions – “mental models” –
about how the world works, what is and isn’t effective and what we
should and shouldn’t do. Examples of mental models include: “If I am
upset at your behavior and say anything, it will damage our
relationship.” “If I admit a mistake you will think I am weak.” Or, “I
will lose credibility if I express any emotion.” It often feels too risky
to test whether these beliefs and assumptions are accurate in
organizational (or even family) settings. Mental models that serve us
early in our careers often cease to be as useful to us later, but leaders
rarely have a venue to test and/or update these limiting assumptions.
A T-group provides such a venue because of its inherent safety (given
that participants in a group are selected such that they are never from
the same organization and highly unlikely to ever work together.)
Furthermore, the evolving nature of a T-group makes it an excellent
site to test additional behaviors. “Additional” because we don’t mean
to imply the key to effective interactions lies in giving up “tried and
true” ways of behaving entirely. There is a difference between
continuing to use what has served us and relying exclusively on a few
patterns of behavior. The goal is to expand our behavioral
repertoire—this is what provides us with a broader interpersonal
toolkit.
• They help us answer: Why should anyone follow me? It is too easy to
be influenced by images of "successful" leaders as portrayed in the
media. Case studies help us learn about leadership by studying other
leaders. This can lead to feeling pressure to show a “presented self”
that is far from whom we really are. The paper on the role of
authenticity in effective leadership explores this topic in much greater
depth. Here we simply want to point out something we consistently
see in T-groups-- the more congruence, appropriate disclosure and
authenticity members are willing to exhibit, the more attractive and
powerful they become to others. This is both validating and freeing.
Getting the most out of a T-Group experience
Experiences by themselves are only experiences. Value occurs when one is
able to distill learning from what has happened. In T-groups, learning occurs
in four major ways.
1. Learning from observation. Observing how others behave can
provide us with options we might not have considered before.
Observing ourselves can be equally if not more useful. How did we
respond (or not respond) and what do we stand to learn about
ourselves from those choices?
2. Learning from our reactions. One especially important aspect of our
response is rooted in emotion. emotional based. By noticing how we 
feel in response to different events (what makes us
comfortable/anxious/safe/happy/sad or scared), we can understand
ourselves more fully.
3. Learning from feedback. This pertains both to the feedback we get
from others as well as the feedback that we give to others. How we
respond says something about us as well as about the other.
4. Learning conceptually. We can make more sense out of our
experience by integrating it with readings, lectures, and class
discussions.
We have listed conceptual learning fourth, deliberately implying that it is
the least important of the four methods. Conceptual learning is important
(which is why we have readings and short lectures) but it is limited. So
are past experiences from other groups since they only provide partial
answers about what generally works. Another gift in the unstructured
nature of a T-group (in addition to presenting members with real
interpersonal problems to resolve) is that each person’s (and each
group’s) resolution will be somewhat unique based on the group’s
composition.
Tips for Working in T-Group
As mentioned at earlier, there will be times when you will feel frustrated and
wonder whether you are making any progress during your T-group
experience. In addition to the tips listed below, we suggest you consult the
FAQs you will receive on Monday of the program as well as re-reading this
paper a few days into the week, at which point some of what is written here
is likely to be easier to understand.
• Learning in T-groups is maximized when participants take an
experimental stance and “try things out” rather than “try to get it
right.”
• “Trying things out,” means taking risks. Our experience tells us that
there is direct correlation between risk taking and learning. Consider
the learning that results from you taking a risk and saying something
about the impact of someone else’s behavior on you and the
opportunity lost for you, them and the group by not taking that risk.
• The most productive learning comes from stating what is “here and
now” in terms of your feelings and reactions (either self-directed or in
response to other participants’ behaviors) as opposed to “there and 
then”, which is characterized by stories about people or situations
“back home” that nobody else in the group know.
• Fuller self-expression of feelings and reactions enables people to
connect better across differences.
• Since this is an inter-dependent learning situation, it is ok to surface
issues even when you don’t have answers.
• Each participant is responsible for his/her own learning and every
member of the group shares equally in their responsibility for building
a learning environment.
• Asking for and/or giving advice, in this context, is the least
productive source of learning.
Conclusion
The extent to which learning is personalized in a T-group makes for a rich
and exciting experience. Participants learn not only how to communicate
more authentically, but also discover that doing so allows them to raise
issues early and resolve them in a manner that benefits all parties. They
learn how to build a supportive group where members can be more fully
themselves and learn from each other. In spite of initial concerns some might
feel about the feedback they receive, most people emerge with a wider range
of self-expression and behavioral choices to draw upon when interacting
with others.
Finally, one of the more exciting outcomes of a T-group is that members
build, in less than twenty hours of meeting time, a high-trust, cohesive
team. More often than not, this is a team in which there is more openness
and support than members experience in any back-home work
group. Participants thus learn not only what they need to do to become more
interpersonally effective, but also gain first-hand knowledge regarding
conditions required to create environments that foster higher-functioning and
higher-performing teams.
(The author gratefully acknowledges contributions by David Bradford and Mary Ann Huckabay
in the development of this paper.)
© Carole Robin, 2016
Based on prior works by David Bradford